This week on the podcast, yet another
extra special guest, Vimal Kapoor, is
CEO and chairman of Honeywell. He's
worked there for the past 37 years, and
not only has he been overseeing
a fascinating transition. Honeywell is
in the midst of breaking itself up into
three distinct parts. I thought this
conversation was fascinating, and I
think you will also. With no further
ado, my conversation with Honeywell's
Vimal Kapoor.
>> [music]
>> Vimal Kapoor, welcome to Bloomberg.
Pleasure, Barry. Thanks for hosting me.
Well, my pleasure to have you here. It's
not very often
we get a member of
the Dow Industrials as part of
our guest. Let let's start out a little
bit with your background. You received a
degree in electronics engineering from
the Thapar Institute of Engineering in
India. India. What was the original
career plan?
Original career plan was to work and get
a job. That was the career plan. Yeah,
that was the career plan. And then, you
know, first I did two small stints of a
job, and then I joined Honeywell in
early '89. It was a new company in
India, just set up. So, I ended up
joining a startup.
Cuz it was set up as a joint venture
between two large companies. There's a
large Indian company called Tata Group.
They Automobiles, everything.
Everything. Right. So, they invested in
this venture. It's big Honeywell with a
lot of tech, and then they create this
joint venture in which you show up. And
it's basically creating something from
scratch. We had no revenue when I
started. Our revenue was 0.00.
>> [snorts]
>> So, you learn how to build a company,
how you scale. You wear multiple hats.
Like in a startup, you don't have a very
defined role.
So, I think that early experience of
high flexibility and
you know, growing through a very high
pace in a short period of time,
that laid some very strong foundations,
you know, uh for me.
>> So, in the United States, out in Silicon
Valley, we notice a lot of these
startups.
Where they end up certainly isn't where
they began. There's a usually a pivot or
three or four.
>> Mhm. Um what was the original idea in
the joint venture and and what did that
eventually turn into?
>> They turn into what it was planned for
because Honeywell did not had its
automation business footprint in India
at that time. So, you're talking 40
years back. So, they partnered with a
local company to scale the business.
They already had those products and
capabilities in US and they were trying
to get into Asia and they formed
partnerships in few countries, India
being one of them. And the strategy was
to penetrate the local market, develop
the local capability and we were able to
do that quite well.
Uh so, it's it's not that we have to
change our product strategy, but we have
to run, learn as we go through. We had
intense local competition.
How do you beat that? How do we create
our own, you know, um
our own revenue stream there? So, it was
a very successful story. So, so you come
up through the operating side, not so
much the you know, Harvard Business
School Davos theory side. How much of an
advantage has that been as your career
clicked through all these different
divisions?
I mean, I think it's a advantage to in a
way to work in a practical business
because you have to deal with actual
problems which the business deal with.
And having worked in different
businesses gave me an opportunity to
deal with the different customer
situation, different end markets,
operational issue, commercial issue,
product development issue, supply chain.
So, I would say, I mean, there is no
replacement to formal education. Uh one,
I'm not suggesting that having a higher
degrees or a disadvantage, but I would
say that there is equal amount of
advantage to get practical experience.
Uh and I I was benefiting from variety
of experiences I got in my long career
in Honeywell.
And you ran three very different
businesses uh before becoming CEO.
Process Solutions, Building
Technologies, Performance Materials.
Tell us I I mean those names seem sort
of ambiguous. Tell us a little bit about
what each of those three divisions did.
>> So, Process Solution business is uh you
know, it provides automation system in
the energy sector. So, energy sector,
think about it, refining uh
petrochemical plants, other oil and gas
facilities, pipeline terminals, even I
would say facilities like which make
paper, um metals and mining. So, these
facilities are very complex in terms of
their operating procedures.
And if they're not automated, it's
nearly impossible to run them. So, this
business provides a sophisticated
automation system to these large
companies. So, think about Exxon and
Shell and BP
uh as kind of typical customer or Aramco
in Middle East and Adnoc. So, this
serving these customer this business was
very global.
Or is very global even today. The
business still is very successful.
And uh I became CEO in 2014 of this
business uh
and oil downturn happened within 6
months of I becoming the leader of the
business. So,
you learn through tough experiences. Oil
price was from whatever $140, $150 to
like a big nose dive.
And we did a lot of work in that
downturn, learned a lot.
Uh but primarily your question, this
this business is all about sophisticated
automation in complex facilities. And
then I moved to the building automation
business, where we still do automation,
but now in this case, buildings of
different type, hospitals, airports,
schools,
uh university campuses,
uh data centers.
And there the business model was very
different. Now you serve multiple
building through variety of channel
partners across the world.
And so our strength comes through
product innovation, our strength comes
through channel management. Uh
very different business model
uh compared to what I did in
uh you know in my in in my process
automation days.
>> And then performance material
>> and technology. Very interesting
business. They build technology they
build energy infrastructure. So if you
want to build a
uh if you are a refiner
you buy crude which we all hear a lot
about today due to you know ongoing Iran
conflict.
You don't sell crude, you sell product.
You sell gasoline, you sell diesel, you
sell jet fuel. So they have options to
make multiple products.
And as the input changes or the market
needs changes, they need to decide what
are the options they have to build
different offering from their
perspective. This business provides
technology to energy company to build
energy infrastructure. Um
cuz it's a molecule
transformation. You're converting one
molecule to another molecule. There's
heavy technology involved behind it. So
performance material and technology
provides technology
uh to the customer to build you know
energy infrastructure. Very high
technology or research oriented
business. Uh
you have a lot of chemical engineers who
are going to invent the next best
technology and you provide the
technology to some very large companies.
And that was fascinating to lead that
business to see that cycle of innovation
and uh
uh work work in that business. So yeah,
very diverse experiences in variety of
sectors, different business models
uh
which I'm benefiting today because now I
have experience of dealing with
different markets and different
situations and that practical experience
helps you a lot as you really get into
your CEO job. So in in 2022 you were
named Chief Operating Officer. We were
just coming out of the pandemic.
What was that environment like? How did
you take your experience at these three
prior divisions where you were either
president or president and CEO? How did
that affect running operations? I mean I
think at that time
uh
the biggest challenge that time actually
was the chip shortages
and how do we really redesign our
products because chips are simply not
available. So you really had to learn
how do we redesign our products in a
much shorter period of time. So think
about if we design a product in 1 year,
we had to do that in 2 months.
Because there's no other option. If we
don't do that, we can't have an
alternative source of the supply and we
can't ship our product. So I used a lot
of experiences on dealing with such
different scenario in my earlier jobs
and we were able to successfully, you
know, deal with that. That was also a
job I also got exposure to the
businesses of Honeywell which I hadn't
done before.
Aerospace being the biggest one.
So that got added into my
responsibility. So there was a lot of
learning there on how that industry
works which is totally different from
everything else I had done.
>> Is there a throughput through materials,
processes, technologies and aerospace or
are these all completely different
animals? Different animals in the sense
of the end markets they serve, right?
There are some commonality of the
business models and you know, there are
there are
there's a common denominator but there
are differences which really led me to
think about whether we are good to be
one company or multiple companies when I
started as a CEO and part of it was the
differences between them but part of it
was opportunities, which is ahead of us,
that how these businesses independently
could shape or scale much differently
versus when we are together, which which
let let us to do a lot of work to think
about optionality and pros and cons of
each option. Uh
and which led us to make a decision that
we are better off to split into three
companies. And and we're going to spend
some time delving into those three
companies and the thinking behind it.
>> Mhm. Before we get to that, I I want to
ask you
um a a couple of more general questions
about the firm.
>> [snorts]
>> Um you've been there so long since since
the 1980s. I'm curious, how has the
culture of Honeywell changed? It's
almost 40 years, three and a half
decades.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh is it still essentially the same
company or
has everything changed like so many
other companies?
>> Yeah, I think it it it evolved a lot. I
would say uh you know, we there was a
big change moment in early 2000 when
Honeywell and Allied Signal merged
together. I would call Yep, so
uh little bit of uh fun fact, Allied
Signal acquired Honeywell and changed
its name to Honeywell. Mhm. Which
doesn't happen. The acquirer keeps name
because they figured Honeywell brand was
so powerful.
I was more impactful, so they changed
their own name. So, that was a big
moment to your question on cultural
assimilation of two large companies. It
was kind of merger of equals.
And it did go through its own motion of
uh ups and downs, and that's when Dave
Cody came in as chairman and CEO of
Honeywell.
And Dave did a great job to rebuild the
company Honeywell culture, which was
much more one company mindset. We are
not two companies, we are one company.
We're going to work towards one stock,
one Honeywell mindset, put a lot of
operational culture uh in the
organization. So, that was one phase of
uh you know, under under his leadership.
Then my my predecessor, Darius Adamczyk,
he became CEO in 2017.
>> [clears throat]
>> He further enhanced our operational
excellence skill. He invested a lot of
effort to build more digital backbone of
the company, simplifying Honeywell in
terms of internal systems we have. Uh
Darius was very passionate about digital
on how to mine data and create more
capability for our customers. So, he
created a culture of
more operational excellence, more
operational rigor. While Dave was much
more focused on one Honeywell mindset,
cultural integration, not multiple
companies. And as my tenure comes in
over the last now 2-plus years, we are
now pivoting from the more
growth-oriented company. And the reason
that's important is that over a period
of time, our margin rates have grown up
>> [clears throat]
>> and
we were sub-10% margin company in
2005-2006.
Last year it was 23%. So, our earnings
growth is going to come more from the
top-line growth versus margin expansion.
Not that we won't do do margin
expansion, but we can't get from another
15%. There's no headroom. So, growth
culture is important, which means we
have to be more externally focused now.
We need to understand our markets, need
to understand our customers, what's
changing, need to understand our
competition.
So, our company, even though name
preserves itself as a heritage and but
it has been constantly evolving itself.
And that's one of the reasons this
company has survived 120 years because
it has courage to reinvent itself versus
being inward-looking and always saying
that, "Okay, we are what we are and
we're not going to change." Really
really interesting. So, I used to hear
people talk about automation
um pretty regularly as just the process
of moving more and more things to
machines. We kind of to people using the
phrase artificial intelligence and AI
the same way kind of bluntly. I'm
curious from the Honeywell perspective,
when it comes to automation and AI, what
are the customers buying? Is it
productivity gains? Is it safety
improvements? Is it cheaper labor or
substitute for labor? What What is the
key selling point for your customers?
>> So, I would say the
we have to go back to where the
automation industry started from to
better appreciate how will AI impact
automation offerings or automation
products.
Go back to mid-70s when this industry
got created somewhere in in mid-75 time
frame.
Uh when
uh computing was invented, chips were
invented,
uh
there came the need to say the world has
a lot of these expensive assets. Those
assets are not running very efficiently.
So, can we move from the older
technologies which were kind of World
War I, World War II war era to more
modern digital technologies? And the way
automation system was created was that
you sense a set of properties on how a
particular equipment or a machine or a
process is running.
And then you have a software program
running in a computer which is going to
make sure that it gets back to the
desired condition what it wants it to
be. It's just a logic-based predefined
system.
Uh and the assumption was most of the
time this will work
in a normal situation. When exception
occur, human will take a call.
So, automation systems were always
designed with a human in the loop. And
human was supposed to take care of
changing input condition, changing
output conditions, maintain the
equipment, take care of maintenance
requirement.
Down the line now you fast forward 50
years before AI and data science came
in.
The
people who were running these equipment
or automation system or different
facilities in different environment,
think of a
pharma manufacturing facility or a data
center, they acquired a knowledge on
exceptions which were occurring in those
operating conditions. But when they
retire or they move on, their knowledge
went along with them. So when the next
set of people came in, they kind of have
the same learning cycle. Maybe some of
it was captured in some documents, some
manuals, but not a lot.
So what AI is solving for is our systems
have no intelligence layer on top of the
core automation layer, so that when the
next human being comes in, they're not
starting from scratch. They have an
advantage of all the learning over the
last 25 years all built in. So they get
to say when this condition occurred,
nine out of 10 time this was done and it
always worked. So you as a human being
can say, "Okay, I think I will choose
this logic makes." So human still needs
to make a decision. So I think it's a
changing the human and making them more
capable at the heart of it.
And the reason it becomes even more
compelling now is the shortage of skills
which are happening in the industrial
sector for performing these kind of
tasks. So I would say it's a perfect uh
convergence of the situation that more
capability is coming into our system
because of availability of data science
uh
and at the same time, situation requires
this capability to be there because less
people are available to do this work.
And that's going to create more
capability in automation system. So
automation system remains intelligence
layer is on top of it. So it makes is
automation system better in terms of
what it can do by preserving its uh
capability. So so let's start out with
um plans to break the firm up. You have
three distinct entities. Mhm. Honeywell
Automation, Honeywell Aerospace, and
then Solstice Advanced Materials. So,
let's talk about that split. Um, that
sounds fairly natural
breakup based on industry. Tell us a
little bit about the thinking behind
that. The thinking behind that was when
I started as a CEO, my incoming pieces
was that we have to simplify this
company. It's performed extremely well,
great return to shareholder, great
service to our customer, but what will
we do for the next 25 or 30 years? Are
we set up for that? And my thesis was
that we need to simplify this into few
things where we have a scale.
But I started the job in middle of '23
as a CEO of the company,
two things happened in the year of '23,
which is good to kind of reflect back
just 3 years back. That was the first
year when the aerospace cycle really
became very strong.
It was the year one where everybody
said, "Oh, this industry is growing a
lot. Let's pay more attention to it."
And this was also the first year when
something called AI was talked.
>> [snorts]
>> Right? So, if you were sitting here 3
years back, we wouldn't be talking AI.
So, it's that recent phenomena.
So, the question we had to really ask
ourselves, that if we have to simplify
as a company,
and these two external drivers are
occurring simultaneously, a huge demand
in our largest business, which is
aerospace,
automation, which is core to Honeywell,
is going to probably redefine itself
with visual AI. Should we do it as one
company, or should we do it as a in a
different construct? And that question
uh get into a problem-solving by early
'24 to say, "Let's look at all the
scenarios, what's possibilities, what
others are doing."
Uh, and as we did the work over 2024,
we got more and more conviction, it's
better to separate automation and
aerospace into two separate companies.
But we ended up making three decisions
because specialty chemical is extremely
good business, which neither fitted in
any one of these two, and we said it's
compelling to also spin that off as a
separate company. So, rather than, you
know, two, it ended up becoming three.
So, they became a standalone business in
October of last year, doing extremely
well since [clears throat] we spun it
off now for 6 months. Very proud of the
management team and the board which is
running this company. The aerospace will
become a standalone company in about 6
to 8 weeks from now, 6 weeks actually,
as we speak today.
Uh 29 June is a date and date is firm.
We We quite committed to that.
And it's going to be a leader in its
segment in aerospace.
And uh remainco will be a pure play
automation company, which will be
probably one of the largest, if not the
largest, automation company in the
world. Hm. So, so
advanced materials, does that include
building technologies and
>> It's a pure play chemicals business.
>> chemical.
>> Chemicals business. They make
refrigerant, which goes into your car,
which goes into your home. They have
some other technologies which are
related to chemicals. That business is
doing extremely well uh as a standalone
company. The automation which you
mentioned, building automation or
automation of industrial facilities,
that's part of the remaining Honeywell.
>> Mhm. Which is Honeywell automation. Now,
we will not be called Honeywell
automation. We're using as just as a
equal descriptor on what the business
will be. We will reimagine our name as
we go by in couple of weeks from now and
we'll reveal that name what it should
be. Uh but it for the sake of
simplicity, a chemicals business, an
aerospace business, and an automation
business. And performance materials and
technology is So, part of it became into
advanced material, advanced material
solstice. Uh-huh. And then part of it is
retained within Honeywell. So, it's
split into kind of two. Cuz this is
really everybody thinks of these very
broadly, but there are some really
narrow specific use cases for different
>> Correct. groups. So,
I was trying to figure out what would
align with what. So, so think about
automation business serves three large
end markets, all types of buildings, all
types of energy facilities, and all
types of industrial facilities.
>> Mhm. That's what we have kept in the
automation. And we also are conscious
that we should not make automation
business serving so many segments that
it becomes confusing again. Right. So,
we want to narrow down to a few very
large and impactful segments. This
market size is about $200 billion.
We will be just shy of $20 billion of
revenue, so we have a lot of runway to
think about creatively what more we can
do, how do we grow more. So, we're not
shortage of runway.
Secularly, automation is a naturally
high-growth what, you know, segment
because it's something which is so basic
to existence of an industrial facility
or on an asset. And then when you add
the AI story coming on top of it, it's
going to have increasingly more a growth
momentum. So, all sent all things being
said, yeah, it's very well positioned
for a compelling future. And what does
the aerospace group do? Not unlike GE,
you're not making aircraft engines.
>> Right. So, we do make aircraft engine
for the business jet, so more mid-size.
>> ones. Smaller engine, the business jet
engines we make. We don't make the big
engines, but we are a systems company.
We make different component from the
nose to tail of the plane. Mhm. Uh so,
our components are right in the cockpit.
Uh our components So, we make radars, we
make navigation system, we make brakes
for the plane, we make environmental
controls in the plane. So, we are a
systems company. We make engines, we
make APUs. So, our our approach is
system design for a new platform. So,
every platform comes in, and it could be
a commercial plane, could be a business
jet, could be a defense platform. Mhm.
We will pitch in different components
and systems of Honeywell. Customers will
select many of them, some of them. Then
that will become part of that
you know, that fleet for
decades and decades. So, it's a multi
product business, not constrained to one
particular product line. And the
business model is more powerful because
it's a systems approach and not a
component approach. So, you're right in
the heart of the systems, you understand
how the whole mechanics work. Uh and
really add more value for our customers.
So, over the past, let's call it 10
years, there have been a number of
activist investors, like Elliott
Management, that not just Honeywell, but
lots and lots of other large
conglomerates.
Um they often agitate for share buybacks
or increased dividends. Um or sometimes
just break the company into pieces.
Uh you seem to have landed pretty much
in a in a similar space as some of these
activists. Um
were they at all influential in your
thinking? Um or was this something that,
"Hey, these are such different
businesses. There's no longer scale
advantages of having them under one
roof?" I I would say that the situation
in our case was a bit unique because we
started doing work to investigate our
future optionality early 2024 and did a
lot of work and actually even announce
the separation of chemicals business in
October.
Elliott wrote a letter, which was in
public domain, and I got to see it at
the same time and I read it immediately.
They all saw it to say we should further
split aerospace and rest of Honeywell,
too. That was their argument, there's a
more value to be created.
The good news was that we already had
done the work and we were convinced
that's the right thing to do, but we had
not announced anything. Mhm. Uh so, we
treated them as another shareholder who
has a point of view
and we have to articulate our strategy.
So, there was strong convergence on the
thinking and I think we have with them
very collaboratively on you know path
forward and I would say that uh
there's a lot of things said on activist
shareholder but my experience is that
they are they are like any other
shareholder
who have a logical argument.
If you have a counter point, you should
support this with the facts and data.
Mhm. Or if you support their point, then
you have to execute it and then in that
case it just becomes much more of not
what to do but how to do it.
So our conversation with Elliott like
any other shareholder was this is the
situation, here are the paths, this is
how we are thinking about it and we
benefited from their expertise in
capital markets. How the shareholders
will react and definitely that helped us
to shape our decision in terms of in a
certain way which was very constructive.
>> Mhm. Really really interesting. So so we
seem to go through these long phases
where conglomerates kind of become in
style, they become favored. Um you
oversaw $14 billion in M&A which sounds
like a lot of money but we know really
isn't you know that's not a that's not a
mega buying spree. Um and for a long for
the longest time it seemed like there
was a financial advantage to being a
conglomerate. At what point does that
structure stop being an advantage? What
is it what is being part throwing all
these different pieces under one roof?
Mhm. What does that prevent the company
from doing? I think every business model
has an era so I think we have to go back
to
what created this era of conglomerate or
larger companies uh
uh
the it really started from the when the
world was started becoming more
globalized after 2000. Mhm. China came
into WTO, the world became more global
uh and there was much more global trade
which became the norm on how companies
were growing. So
US companies started growing globally.
But, at the same time, they were able to
drive a lot of productivity by taking
manufacturing into Asia.
A lot of, you know, man power
productivity by doing work in different
virtual way with a lot of IT skills
coming in.
So, there was a case to make bigger
companies bigger because they had the
unique know-how to drive a lot of
productivity and scale at a global scale
because they were already present there.
And that cycle persisted for almost 15
years
till the time that value was captured.
And that value capture became generally
known. Therefore, the question started
asking to say,
"Is creating this complex company worth
it or simplification or a sector focus
is a better way to do it?" So, I think
there was a reason that proposition
really worked well and created a lot of
value. Take a case of Honeywell. Our
shareholder value creation from a time
of 2000 to 2017-18 was the best in class
in the entire S&P.
So, it's not that anything was wrong. We
created tremendous shareholder value.
But, now this point of saturation comes
in. And then it really brings you to the
point of specialization if the markets
have scale
and you can preserve scale while you are
specialist. That's best of the both
worlds. And that's what we are we are
doing now to create a scale aerospace
company, a scale automation company. We
are still very global. We still have
very mature processes.
But, at the same time, we are focused on
singular segment. So, I I guess like in
everything else, you learn through
cycles. And this cycle is all about
having the mix of scale and
specialization.
This will persist if something else
comes in now where there's a case to do
something else.
And I feel good about where we are in
our position and it is going to create
much more shareholder value. So, 20
years before you started talking about
um breaking into three pieces, your
fellow Dow component, General Electric,
went through the same process.
Arguably,
with not a whole lot of success. They
started out fairly richly valued. There
wasn't a whole lot of room to grow. And,
um, I'm curious
when you're thinking about breaking into
three, are you looking at other
companies like General Electric and
saying, "What can we learn from what
they did right, what they got wrong,
what what missteps they made?" I think
the situation for each company is very
different because
separation cannot create value alone by
itself. You have to be convicted that
the standalone asset has enough growth
potential and invest and asset base
which is going to grow, which is going
to create value. So, I think comparing
example you gave versus Honeywell is
absolutely very different portfolio.
>> oranges. Very, very different. I mean,
so I would say that our drivers were
more around what I talked about.
Our stock prices were more static. Uh,
we were
more we did not destroy any shareholder
value. So, our question was how do we
create more shareholder value with
external factors coming in, growth of
aerospace, growth of AI. Is that
inflection point for us to make a
different decision? So, we did it more
from a point of strength versus we have
some crisis coming in. So, sometimes you
use your point of strength to make the
right decisions. Uh, and we did it fast
and we did it right. Uh, I think every
other company we came from a different
circumstances.
Uh, but the decision on the outward they
look very similar. They look like they
all did the same thing, but they all
came from very different backgrounds
and, you know, different set of assets.
Uh,
when when we started looking at it, some
people believe that we we got
uh, influenced by success of GE. I want
to remind that GE's success came post
our decision. That was a process which
was occurring. Mhm. So, yeah, you have
that's a data point to say they are also
doing it, but some of the success we
have observed, some outstanding work by
the GE leadership team, that really
started happening 24, 25 time frame.
Mhm. We were far along the way in our
own analysis by that time. So, I think
those are kind of parallel things
happening. So, there's no one thing you
can attribute to say that this thing
influenced it. It's a combination of the
reason which all come together.
And that's what really brings us to
where we are today. Uh I like this
phrase in your thesis of the con
transition
from automation to autonomy with
artificial intelligence as as the
dividing line.
>> Mhm. How far along
that process are we as a country, are
our the industrial sector, and
Honeywell?
So, I would say that uh
we as a country have an advantage of
being the leader in the space of cloud
and data science.
And companies like Honeywell has
responsibility to take that know-how
which the tech sector is creating, be it
Microsoft, be it Google, be it Nvidia,
and all the
you know, uh very capable tech
companies. How do we bring that
capability into our sector?
Because our customer is not going to go
and they are not looking to buy a cloud
capability or they are not looking to
buy a AI LLM.
They want to solve a problem. They want
to run a business. They want to run an
operation. They want to have more up
time. They want to have more,
you know, profitability. So, our job is
to take our system to what I mentioned
to you before and add this intelligence
layer. And what this intelligence layer
is all about taking capability from the
tech companies, take large language
models from the likes of Google and
Nvidia,
uh use the cloud power which is there
from Amazon and Microsoft, but really
build a purpose-built offering from an
the sector.
And as we are doing that, we are able to
create the agentic models for our
customers, and that's what they buy from
us. The underlying plumbing, what we
have, they don't want to know it. They
don't want to know how this is built.
They say, "Yeah, so you're automating
this piece of my work. That's great. So,
I'm going to get more productivity for
that. How much I should pay you for it,
right?" So, I would say we are in the
state that this is no more a hypothesis.
We are in the
not in the early innings, but we are in
the stage of deployment of these
capabilities across different customer
base.
The
why it is not taken up at scale is
because our customers have to go through
a significant change management in their
organization, cuz fundamentally the
roles of people are changing.
The some roles require skills which are
less important today, and some more new
skills are required. And they can't do
that overnight just because I created
new set of technology.
They have to absorb it. They have to
ingest it. But, we have some fabulous
examples on customer using in scale in
different sectors like university
systems, quick service restaurants.
People are using some of our
technologies at a very large scale. In
refineries, etc. So, I would say that if
I'm sitting with you at 12 months back,
I would have said very modest
deployment. Sitting today, I would say
I'm very excited on what opportunity we
see. A year from now,
I would argue that the penetration will
go up substantially up because there's a
real economic value creation from what
we are really properly. And we as a
country are leading
uh because we have the core components
of this technology.
And now we have to, you know, take this
capability across the world. And our
customers are excited. They really like
what we are doing. Um earlier you
mentioned uh restaurant automation. What
does Honeywell do
uh for either fast food service or
casual dining? Mhm. You see, think about
it. I mean, when you look at a small
fast food dining restaurant,
there's not much automation in that, but
it consumes energy for sure. I mean,
let's take a typical McDonald's
restaurant as a just as an example.
There's a kitchen there, there's a
fryer, there's a refrigeration which is
keeping lot of products there. There's
of course lights going on.
These assets were never thought as a way
to improve energy efficiencies by
companies like us. We say we should
automate a large hospital. Mhm. Oh, it's
massive. There's a lot of opportunity
there. A large building. These assets
were never paid attention by us because
there was no technology available. But
when the cloud technology came in, we
are able to connect these assets
flawlessly, uh you know, in a matter of
hours. And then you're able to use a lot
of AI-based rule set to understand what
should be the energy consumption actual
versus what it is today. And give that
tools to the owner to say, you know, in
example, we connected a quick service
chain in UK, I think something like 500
plus of their restaurants into a single
operating system.
And they are observing 30 to 40% energy
reduction. Like anything else, the good
old management principle, what you
inspect is what you get.
Once these were thinking running off my
own, nobody paid attention. Even though
they desired to do something, there was
no mechanism.
So we created an easy mechanism to make
this available to the customer. So all
of a sudden they're able to generate lot
more productivity without adding too
much of cost. And that's the part of the
new tools which is coming in, which was
not possible. And that
gives me a lot of excitement that this
is going to be much more level of, uh,
you know, productivity, efficiency,
which is less talked about. You know,
whenever there's a AI dialogue, it's
about jobs, it's going to cut jobs.
Nobody talks about economic value
creation it is doing. A real value for
our customer base, making people more
productive. Uh, that's the story of the
industrial side, which is probably
requires more more amplification. So,
what what's the Peter Drucker quote? You
can't manage what you can't measure. So,
forget 500 restaurants. What is
Starbucks? 30,000? McDonald's? 40,000?
>> to all of these kind of asset and many
people have done this work. So, it's not
that we have created some new invention.
Some of them have done this kind of uh,
discovery, but this
effort was not very standardized. It's
like a custom-made thing somebody will
do because you you're [snorts] a big
company, you can afford it. But, when
you do it a large scale, there are
hundreds of these chains. There are
hundreds of retail stores. We're also
doing similar work. One of the uh, big
retail store chains, very similar
example. So, these distributed assets
are becoming a way of capturing value.
That's one end of the equation. On the
other end of the equation, when you have
retirals coming
and our customers are worried about
knowledge going out of the door, they're
looking at a mechanism of knowledge
capture so they can perform their task.
That's also penetrating very rapidly.
So, scenarios are different. Some
scenarios are looking at, I never paid
attention. Mhm. And now I can do it.
Some are saying, I have less people, do
something about it. And but the
capability is fundamentally the same.
It's the same capability which solves
both the problem.
And that's the power of the cloud.
That's the power of AI which are
bringing to our customer side.
>> So, so I'm curious as to how some
technologies seem to just take forever
to find their way
>> Mhm. um, into the real world. You know,
if you travel around the world, um, I
remember the first time I saw one of the
point of sale handheld units in a
restaurant
>> Mhm. in Europe. I don't know, maybe it
was 15 years ago. And I was astonished.
Wait, I don't have to request the check.
>> Mhm. They come, then they have to give
them the key the card, they go away.
Like, I will take a check, they come by.
It's
It seems to have taken a decade to make
its way here.
What are some of the impediments to some
of this
uh some of the cutting-edge
technologies? That's obviously using a
bunch of tech that already existed. Uh
i- Is this a problem getting adaptation
even though it was clearly more
productive, more efficient, faster turn
of tables? Like, I I was astonished how
long it took for the United States to to
implement that.
>> Fair. I think uh there's a scenario in
your example because it's a technology
displacement of some old method versus a
more new method. But, the reason I
believe more bullish about it is that we
are solving a known problem. And the
known problem is world has less people
to do a lot of work around skilled labor
in the industrial world. That's a real
problem. So, our solution is not trying
to find a problem. We are find We are
giving a solution to a known problem.
Adoption rates are lower because of the
change management issue, but this is a
change management of the order of 18
months, 24 months, 30 months. This is
not a decade. Not a decade. So, I remain
very optimistic given my,
you know, experience in these sectors
that adoption rates here going to be
much more quicker because the problem is
real.
We We are not inventing the problem.
This problem exist for a
And by the way, this problem is
everywhere in the world.
This is not a US problem only.
>> Skilled labor. Skilled labor. Europe has
more shrinkage than US. Go to Japan and
Korea, they have the same problem. China
has population shrinkage. So, this is a
universal issue. This is not invented
here. Now, we get excited on the job
displacement happening with robots and
humanoids. That's a small portion of a
manufacturing industry.
And that probably is also displacing
some tasks which humans are not willing
to do, like lifting boxes. right? Yeah,
I mean, okay, it's not very interesting.
Uh
but then there are other jobs with other
sectors which we address where a
physical AI or intelligence layer is
going to create tremendous amount of
economic value. So, I keep hearing
people compare that intelligence layer
of artificial intelligence to the
internet. I'm wondering and you seem
very bullish and excited about
everything AI can do.
Is there a better comparison? Is the
industrial revolution a better framework
for thinking about the impact of AI over
the next
10, 50, 100 years?
>> the AI impact will be different in each
sector and I think if we make it too
broad brush,
we are losing the bigger picture. But
when we are making it specific to a
segment, then you're being more precise
to say in context of the end markets we
serve, the industrial sector. I talked
about examples.
There it's all about the skill shortage
issue, which is very different from if
we are using AI for better search
engine, if I may using AI for, you know,
making a summary of our talk, which
somebody can do in That's a very
different use case and one can argue is
it going to add productivity or not or
is it going to take away jobs? That's a
different scenario from simply not
having people to do work.
Very different scenario and I think that
makes our case more compelling. The
adoption rates are driven by a near real
real need versus we're trying to create
a need which is unknown and that's not
being talked a lot more. Lot more
dialogue is around job displacements,
but those are more in the jobs which
could be automated like finance function
or HR function. Maybe to a certain
degree it's true, but not to the point
My personal view is that it's going to
have the amount of impact which is being
talked about. So, let's talk about some
of the challenges of this technology
layer and and some of the black hats out
there.
Um when Mythos came out, I would imagine
a company like Honeywell uh set up and
took notice. The idea of of AI taking
over
uh industrial controllers, power, water,
air conditioning, all that stuff has to
be thought of as a genuine threat.
Nobody wants rogue thermostats or what
have you. Um how do you look at the
threat from a a a powerful entity like
Mythos and how much of an arms race are
we in to harden all of our, you know,
soft underbelly? So, I think we have to
appreciate the fact that uh
where we are deploying AI,
it is substantially [clears throat]
different from
what we are generally talking about in
uh broader public domain.
If you think of applying AI in an
industrial system, let's take a case of
a hospital and I want to apply AI into
automation system to make it more
efficient. The data of that is not in
public domain. Mhm. The data is in
Honeywell system or some one of our
competitors' system. So, you cannot go
to internet and train anything cuz
there's nothing to train on.
Uh so, that makes data friction as a big
problem in industrial sector, which in a
way becomes a protection layer for us.
>> So, the friction
>> mean becomes a protection layer.
>> But it doesn't mean we should not do
anything about it.
>> Right. It's to say, "Oh, I'm protected."
It means we should take it seriously to
think of potential threats coming in
because of the data friction is removed,
which is hard to do, but it humans are
very intelligent. So,
we have worked very hard to remove the
data friction and also use our domain
knowledge because, interestingly,
you cannot solve a horizontal problem
in industrial domain. What I mean by
that is
you do not have a software application
like a CRM system or an HR system. The
problems of each sectors are very
different. If you're a refinery, you're
trying to produce more jet fuel and more
diesel. If you are a life sciences
manufacturing facility, you're trying to
produce drug with minimal quality
giveaway.
Uh but if you're a data center, you want
more uptime. Your problems are so
different. So, we can't create a magic
AI application and sell to everybody.
We have to be purposeful that where do
we use our data and what problem we
solve, which only come from years of
experience. So, those two really become
in a way a constraint for a generic
company to come in because of data
friction and lack of understanding of
domain.
Which means companies like us which
possess both have to solve this problem.
And that's why we are very bullish about
it to say we are going to do it. We are
going to take all the capabilities from
tech companies and build new set of
capabilities to take our industry from a
pure play automation to move towards
autonomy. And autonomy doesn't mean
humans will disappear. Humans will
become more empowered. Humans will
become more capable.
And to the extent there is some skill
shortages, it'll address that point.
So, let's talk a little bit about how
tumultuous the past 12 months have been
in terms of of geopolitics.
We We not only have the war in the
Ukraine, but now in Iran. We had the
on-again, off-again, on-again, and most
recently off-again tariffs. How does
this affect how a company like Honeywell
thinks about reshoring and bringing
manufacturing back to the United States,
thinks about supply chain issues? How do
you plan in such a tumultuous
environment? Well, it's definitely a
challenge for companies to have more
stability is what companies want. Uh so,
I would say that companies like us have
very mature processes to deal with it.
So, every time this issue occurs, we
have some sort of disturbance for
depends 4 weeks, 8 weeks,
20 weeks, who knows, depending on the
situation. So, we have learned how to
deal with it, but it doesn't come
without a cost. You lose some growth in
that window.
You may have to incur extra cost like it
happened in case of tariff, because when
tariff got announced, we have no choice
but to pay it. Right. Right. Now,
whether we can recover it or not is a
subsequent decision.
>> Are you one of the many companies that
have filed litigation to get get
refunds?
>> not file any litigation. Uh how big of a
hit were you guys taking?
>> It was not big for us. We were mostly
down to the second part of your
question.
We have been doing manufacturing local
for local for multiple years. So, we
made for US in US, made for Europe in
Europe, made for China in China. So, we
don't move lot of stuff around. However,
what we cannot control is the global
nature of the components we buy. Right.
If I have to buy
>> Everything in the supply chain and raw
materials.
>> Correct, because we can't make
everything. So, if it if a component is
made in Korea, like batteries, we have
to buy it from there.
And if a component is made in China or
somewhere else, we have to buy it from
there. So, that impact is certainly not
under our coverage, because we don't
have an endless capacity to invest in
everything. But, our core manufacturing
uh
we have 150 factories.
You know, uh and they are well
distributed around the world and they
are well distributed across the world. I
mean, so we are So, we don't have this
foundational challenge of reshoring.
Uh
but, we certainly have to deal with
changing environment in which we have to
think about more local supply base
development aligned to what the
expectations are at this point of time.
Huh. So, we've noticed that defense
budgets really around the world, not
just here in the United States,
have been rising and and there certainly
has been fairly robust demand for uh
aerospace. There's a big upgrade cycle
just kind of starting. A lot of the
fleets are pretty old. How do you look
at this in terms of risk and
opportunity? How are you thinking about
defense and aerospace?
>> Defense is a big opportunity for our
aerospace business. That's about 40% of
the aerospace business. It's certainly
uh the current changes in geopolitical
environment and government spending more
money is only positive. So, it's going
to become a even more growth driver for
the business compared to what it had.
So, when we started this thesis 2 2 and
1/2 years back, we did not predict this
level of demand in the defense. Uh
but now that's really a reality. Uh
whether it's in US, whether it's some of
our US allies, uh there's a lot more
growth opportunity across the board for
different products and services we
provide.
And then there's been some debate about
uh the future of technology and
industry. China seems to be running away
in a couple of areas like energy
transition and robotics. From From where
you sit, uh
is the lead going to pass back and forth
or is there a clear winner and that's a
potential problem for the United States
both strategically and economically? I
think we have to look at what's look
ahead versus kind of look back and be,
you know, uh
skeptical about it. I feel we will look
ahead.
The problems which the world is in head
of us, uh we clearly know the US lead in
AI. So, how do we protect the lead? We
clearly have a lead in quantum. It's one
of the businesses we own that how do we
really keep that scale? You do I didn't
realize. What What does Honeywell do in
the quantum space?
>> own a business called Quantinuum in
which Honeywell has a majority stake. We
spun it off a separate company in 2021.
Oh, okay. All right. So, it's not it's
Honeywell investments in that company
versus it's not part of Honeywell. I I
recall
uh I recall that way back when. That's
right.
>> Really really fascinating. Correct. So,
there are technologies in which US have
an advantage. US have to rebuild its
supply base or some of the critical
sectors like semiconductor, like
pharmaceutical, which are mission
critical.
And I think that's
underway, but we need to have a patience
that those things take years to happen.
There's not a switch to say we want to
do it and those things show up. They can
take 5, 7, 10 years. So, I think it's
heading in the right direction.
We as a country has all the
capabilities. We have the capital, we
have the know-how, but we have to
refurbish some of our skill which we
lost over a couple of years in few
portions of industrial sector.
But let's not forget we have very, very
capable companies which created the same
sector all over the world. So, they
those have not gone away.
>> So, reshoring is not as challenging as a
lot of people make it out to It is more
thoughtful in terms of which how do you
prioritize. All things being equal,
reshoring is the right thing to do, but
my personal view is we should pick up
the top five and say, "Okay, here are
the five we want to go really go after
and make it successful." Because try to
do everything is going to be just
extremely difficult in order of
prioritization. So, final question
before I get to our our speed round.
What do you think when when it comes to
automation and artificial intelligence,
what do you think business people and
investors for that matter really are
misunderstanding? What What little
nugget that you've experienced would
give them a little more insight into
what the future looks like? I think the
point we discussed earlier that
the
automation gets heavily enabled by AI
and really create the intelligence layer
and that opportunity it creates is being
underestimated. Uh I think this
opportunity is real because of the skill
shortage, because of the knowledge gap
which has a got created over a period of
time. So, I truly believe that's
something which needs more more
conversation and more emphasis. So, so I
only have you for another 3 minutes, so
let me click through these questions
really quickly. Starting with
um tell us about your mentors who helped
shape your career.
My early managers, I mean, I was lucky
to have some very good managers who
taught me different things. You know,
not to be fearful about whom you're
talking to, how do you think about value
propositions, how to think global scale.
So I think in Honeywell you're blessed
to have some very strong leaders in
different part of my career in the first
15-20 years, which really shape you.
Because if you what shapes you is the
first 15-ish years of your life. Because
once those value system is built in your
brain, you kind of live with that.
And I was benefiting from some very
powerful mentors in in different parts
of the company. Let's talk about books.
What are some of your favorites? What
are you reading recently?
So books I read variety both from
leadership to sector specific.
The recent one of the book I'm reading
is The Prize from Daniel Yergin. If
anybody is interested about oil economy,
please do read it. Six months back I
started reading Chip War.
So some of the sector specific things,
but also read about leadership of some
of the people I admire. Dave Cote who
was chair CEO of Honeywell for a long
time. He has some very fascinating book.
Winning now
and winning later. Indra Nooyi joined
our board recently. She has some
fascinating leadership books. I read
some of them.
I read a lot of books on China.
I think it's underestimated the scale of
that economy. So I think we just need to
There's a book called World's View of
China's View of the World. Very
interesting book. It's like we have a
view about China. What about their view?
Have we ever asked them the question why
do you do what do you do?
So I kind of have very diverse
reading habits of you know, reading from
my business specific to leadership to
some of the country specifics. Yeah,
target around a lot on that. And our
final two questions, what sort of advice
would you give to a recent college
graduate interested a career in either a
engineering or management. I mean, both
are fascinating career. I would say
engineering is a career which gives you
a lot of options.
Uh so, do pursue that because it gives
you wide variety of choices.
Management is something that people
should do who have more willingness to
take a risk and have courage to make
decisions. Because in the end, at some
point in your career, you will have to
do both.
And if you think that's not your sphere,
that's something you're not good at it,
I would rather argue then you choose
something you're really good at versus
otherwise you're going to get saturated
at some point. But management is an
excellent career by itself. So, both are
both are excellent. And our final
question, what do you know about the
world of automation engineering
and artificial technology today that
might have been useful 37 years ago when
you first started at Honeywell?
I don't know. I think I I'm always
excited about learning new technology
all the time.
Uh you know, I'm still very curious to
read things how they work.
Uh
I I think I will say that staying
curious is very important for us as a
human being. We should never be
satisfied on what we know.
We should always ask the question what
we do not know, whether it is about a
technology or a business process or for
that matter any fact of life.
And more you are curious, more
successful you are because you're
open-minded and you're always willing to
learn. And that has been my principle
all my life, always learn something new
about anything and you feel very
fulfilled. Huh. Really really terrific.
Vimal, thank you so much for being so
generous with your time. We have been
speaking with Vimal Kapoor, CEO and
Chairman of Honeywell. If you enjoyed
this conversation, well, be sure and
check out any of the previous [music]
we've done over the past 12 and 1/2
years. You can find those at Bloomberg,
iTunes, Spotify, YouTube, [music] or
wherever you find your favorite
podcasts.
I would be remiss if I didn't thank the
correct team that helps put these
conversations together. Amongst the many
people who helped me, Alexis Noriega is
my video producer, Shawn Russo is my
researcher, Anna Luke is my producer.
I'm Barry Ritholtz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.